# Testing the plugin

Complete plugin can be tested locally before adding it to the [NOMAD Oasis image](../../howto/oasis/configure.md).

If you use `nomad-distro-dev` development environment, all functionality of the plugin can be tested within GUI by restarting the appworker and/or the GUI. For details, please see the `README.md` file of the [`nomad-distro-dev` repository](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-distro-dev){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}.

For the stand-alone installation of the plugin, other options are available: parsing only with a command line, or parsing and normalization with a python script.

## Parsing only with a command line

The parsing can be tested at any moment using a built-in NOMAD command `parse`.

1. Ensure that all the requirements for the plugin are installed. If you use `uv` in a stand-alone installation, run

    ```sh
    uv sync --extra dev
    ```

2. Run the parser with a selected input file:

    ```sh
    uv run nomad parse PATH/TO/THE/SELECTED/INPUT/FILE
    ```

    The result will be shown in the terminal. You can also save it into some temporary file, for example:

    ```sh
    uv run nomad parse PATH/TO/THE/SELECTED/INPUT/FILE > result.json
    ```

## Parsing and normalization with a python script

You can import `parse()` and `normalize_all()` functions from `nomad.client` in a python script. For example, if you want to test the resulting code in [Tutorial 3](./create_parser_hybrid.md), you can parse the provided `metadata.xml` file. The `parse()` function will return the raw data entry, and the additional ELN entry `metadata.archive.json` will be created in the working folder. This new entry can also be opened as a separate archive with an additional call of `parse()`, and either archive can be normalized with the `normalize_all()`. The archives can be viewed with `m_to_dict()` method of the archive; `json.dumps()` standard function improves the readability of the output.

```py
import json

from nomad.client import normalize_all, parse

## parsing raw data file
archive_raw = parse(
    'src/nomad_plugin_tutorials/parsers/data/om_example/metadata.xml'
)[0]

## exploring the raw data file archive
print(json.dumps(archive_raw.m_to_dict(), indent = 2))

## parsing ELN archive generated by the raw data file parsing
archive_eln = parse(
    'src/nomad_plugin_tutorials/parsers/data/om_example/metadata.archive.json'
)[0]

## normalizing ELN archive
## now the schema will be populated from the original data file
normalize_all(archive_eln)

## exploring the 'data' entry of the ELN archive
print(json.dumps(archive_eln.data.m_to_dict(), indent = 2))

```
